Question 1. Write short note on CPU scheduling algorithms:
Ans: Why do we need scheduling?
A typical process involves both I/O time and CPU time. In a uni programming system like MS-DOS, time spent waiting for I/O is wasted and CPU is free during this time. In multi programming systems, one process can use CPU while another is waiting for I/O. This is possible only with process scheduling.

 Objectives of Process Scheduling Algorithm

Max CPU utilization [Keep CPU as busy as possible]
Fair allocation of CPU.
Max throughput [Number of processes that complete their execution per time unit]
Min turnaround time [Time taken by a process to finish execution]
Min waiting time [Time a process waits in ready queue]
Min response time [Time when a process produces first response]

Question 2. What is preemptive vs non preemptive scheduling algos:
Ans : 1. Preemptive Scheduling: 
Preemptive scheduling is used when a process switches from running state to ready state or from the waiting state to ready state. 
The resources (mainly CPU cycles) are allocated to the process for a limited amount of time and then taken away, 
and the process is again placed back in the ready queue if that process still has CPU burst time remaining. 
That process stays in the ready queue till it gets its next chance to execute. 
Algorithms based on preemptive scheduling are: Round Robin (RR),Shortest Remaining Time First (SRTF), Priority (preemptive version), etc. 

Question 3. Write the best and/or practical scheduling algo, with reason ?
Ans : Different Scheduling Algorithms
First Come First Serve (FCFS): Simplest scheduling algorithm that schedules according to arrival times of processes. First come first serve scheduling algorithm states that the process that requests the CPU first is allocated the CPU first. It is implemented by using the FIFO queue. When a process enters the ready queue, its PCB is linked onto the tail of the queue. When the CPU is free, it is allocated to the process at the head of the queue. The running process is then removed from the queue. FCFS is a non-preemptive scheduling algorithm.

Note:First come first serve suffers from convoy effect.

Shortest Job First (SJF): Process which have the shortest burst time are scheduled first.If two processes have the same bust time then FCFS is used to break the tie. It is a non-preemptive scheduling algorithm.




Longest Job First (LJF): It is similar to SJF scheduling algorithm. But, in this scheduling algorithm, we give priority to the process having the longest burst time. 
This is non-preemptive in nature i.e., when any process starts executing, can’t be interrupted before complete execution.

Shortest Remaining Time First (SRTF): It is preemptive mode of SJF algorithm in which jobs are schedule according to shortest remaining time.

Longest Remaining Time First (LRTF): It is preemptive mode of LJF algorithm in which we give priority to the process having largest burst time remaining.

Round Robin Scheduling: Each process is assigned a fixed time(Time Quantum/Time Slice) in cyclic way.It is designed especially for the time-sharing system. 
The ready queue is treated as a circular queue. The CPU scheduler goes around the ready queue, 
allocating the CPU to each process for a time interval of up to 1-time quantum. To implement Round Robin scheduling, we keep the ready queue as a FIFO queue of processes. New processes are added to the tail of the ready queue. The CPU scheduler picks the first process from the ready queue, sets a timer to interrupt after 1-time quantum, and dispatches the process. One of two things will then happen. The process may have a CPU burst of less than 1-time quantum. In this case, the process itself will release the CPU voluntarily. The scheduler will then proceed to the next process in the ready queue. Otherwise, if the CPU burst of the currently running process is longer than 1-time quantum, the timer will go off and will cause an interrupt to the operating system. A context switch will be executed, and the process will be put at the tail of the ready queue. The CPU scheduler will then select the next process in the ready queue.

Priority Based scheduling (Non-Preemptive): In this scheduling, processes are scheduled according to their priorities, i.e., highest priority process is scheduled first. If priorities of two processes match, then schedule according to arrival time. Here starvation of process is possible.

Highest Response Ratio Next (HRRN): In this scheduling, processes with highest response ratio is scheduled. This algorithm avoids starvation.

Response Ratio = (Waiting Time + Burst time) / Burst time
Multilevel Queue Scheduling: According to the priority of process, processes are placed in the different queues. 
Generally high priority process are placed in the top level queue. Only after completion of processes from top level queue, lower level queued processes are scheduled. 
It can suffer from starvation.

Multi level Feedback Queue Scheduling: It allows the process to move in between queues. 
The idea is to separate processes according to the characteristics of their CPU bursts. If a process uses too much CPU time, it is moved to a lower-priority queue.