What is the CAP Theorem?
In the last section, you understood what each term means in the CAP theorem. Now let us understand the theorem itself.

The CAP theorem states that a distributed database system has to make a tradeoff between Consistency and Availability when a Partition occurs.

A distributed database system is bound to have partitions in a real-world system due to network failure or some other reason. Therefore, 
partition tolerance is a property we cannot avoid while building our system. So a distributed system will either choose to give up on Consistency or 
Availability but not on Partition tolerance.

For example in a distributed system, if a partition occurs between two nodes, it is impossible to provide consistent data on both the nodes and availability of complete data. Therefore, in such a scenario we either choose to compromise on Consistency or on Availability. Hence, a NoSQL distributed database is either characterized as CP or AP. CA type databases are generally the monolithic databases that work on a single node and provide no distribution. Hence, they require no partition tolerance.

 

Understanding CP with MongoDB
Let’s try to understand how a distributed system would work when it decides to give up on Availability during a partition with the help of MongoDB.

CAP theorem CP with Mongodb

MongoDB is a NoSQL database that stores data in one or more Primary nodes in the form of JSON files. 
Each Primary node has multiple replica sets that update themselves asynchronously using the operation log file of their respective primary node. 
The replica set nodes in the system send a heartbeat (ping) to every other node to keep track if other replicas or primary nodes are alive or dead. 
If no heartbeat is received within 10 seconds, then that node is marked as inaccessible.

If a Primary node becomes inaccessible, then one of the secondary nodes needs to become the primary node. Till a new primary is elected from amongst the secondary nodes, the system remains unavailable to the user to make any new write query. Therefore, the MongoDB system behaves as a Consistent system and compromises on Availability during a partition.

Address Resolution Protocol (arp)
The address resolution protocol (arp) is a protocol used by the Internet Protocol (IP) [RFC826], specifically IPv4, 
to map IP network addresses to the hardware addresses used by a data link protocol. 
The protocol operates below the network layer as a part of the interface between the OSI network and OSI link layer. It is used when IPv4 is used over Ethernet.

The term address resolution refers to the process of finding an address of a computer in a network. 
The address is “resolved” using a protocol in which a piece of information is sent by a client process executing on the local computer to a server process executing on a remote computer. 
The information received by the server allows the server to uniquely identify the network system for which the address was required and therefore to provide the required address. 
The address resolution procedure is completed when the client receives a response from the server containing the required address.

An Ethernet network uses two hardware addresses which identify the source and destination of each frame sent by the Ethernet. 
The destination address (all 1’s) may also identify a broadcast packet (to be sent to all connected computers). 
The hardware address is also known as the Medium Access Control (MAC) address, in reference to the standards which define Ethernet. 
Each computer network interface card is allocated a globally unique 6 byte link address when the factory manufactures the card (stored in a PROM). 
This is the normal link source address used by an interface. A computer sends all packets which it creates with its own hardware source link address, 
and receives all packets which match the same hardware address in the destination field or one (or more) pre-selected broadcast/multicast addresses.

The Ethernet address is a link layer address and is dependent on the interface card which is used. 
IP operates at the network layer and is not concerned with the link addresses of individual nodes which are to be used.
The address resolution protocol (arp) is therefore used to translate between the two types of address. 
The arp client and server processes operate on all computers using IP over Ethernet. 
The processes are normally implemented as part of the software driver that drives the network .


Explain DHCP, ARP and NAT:
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) is a network protocol that enables a server to automatically assign an
IP address to a computer from a defined range of numbers (i.e., a scope) configured for a given network.

What is NAT in simple terms?
NAT stands for network address translation. It's a way to map multiple local private addresses to a public one before transferring the information. 
Organizations that want multiple devices to employ a single IP address use NAT, as do most home routers.
